The rest of you don't look like you've been
eating biscuits the whole summer. You take,
Take your biscuit back.
I'm actually did walk them around the, I've set up, got this
Very kind. I'll have one.
I'll have one afterwards. Otherwise
Do that. Super.
All right, minister, thank you very much
for making yourself available this morning.
The committee is very interesting
to hear about the New Zealand Indian Free Trade Agreement.
Yep. Now we have 45 minutes set down
for the discussion this morning.
We welcome comments from the South and your team,
and then I'm sure there'll be questions from members.
Well, colleagues, thank you very much
and thank you for the invitation to come
and talk about the India, FDA.
Uh, uh, there's a range of other things happening in trade
that, uh, have, um, impact
and effects upon New Zealand are involved in.
Uh, I propose not to talk about those today from WTO meeting
that's coming up to the, the, the future investment
and trade partnership that New Zealand was instrumental in
creating to many other things,
but happy to come back at any other time, uh,
that you may wish to get into that.
And so today, just to focus on India, uh, you know, Les, uh,
Les who, um, who, uh, is, uh,
was the chief negotiator responsible for the FDA.
Uh, he, uh, did more than 20 visits to India over the last,
uh, two years, uh, to, uh, you know, work very hard to get,
uh, one of the best deals India has done
with any country of the world.
Uh, and so he
and his extended team, we should be very proud
of the efforts they've put in on behalf of New Zealand.
And as I think the leader of the position has said the last,
uh, couple of days, uh, we can trust these people
when they say it is a good deal
because of the same people
that negotiated the previous agreements that do nothing
but provide opportunity for New Zealanders
and create jobs, uh, through trade and through export.
So, I just want to on behalf of, uh, uh, as minister,
but I think all of you thank them for their, uh,
incredible effort over the last, uh, two years.
Um, the, this FDA, uh, um,
delivers much more than many people thought it may be able
to, uh, with a country India of 1.4 billion people.
And I, I want to say that again,
and we should think about that.
New Zealand, we are 5 million people. India are 1.4 billion.
We have nothing but opportunity here.
95% of everything we sell them will be tariff free
or have significant very steep, uh, tariff reduction on it.
82% of our exports will be tariff free when it's fully
enforced, about 57% on day one.
And, uh, you know, those, those areas particularly
to focus on, think about, about tar free from wood.
Uh, most wood products, uh, including, uh, processed timber,
uh, seafood, coal, sheep, meat,
and many industrial products, much more,
the terrace will be eliminated.
Um, if you think about it from the point of view of, uh,
an engagement in trade with India, our trade is modest.
When you consider the relative size of that market,
some billions of dollars worth of two-way trade each year.
It's not far away from the two-way trade that we had China
when our FDA with them was negotiated.
Uh, estimates are, it's very hard to estimate.
In fact, um, I've got say that some
of the estimates we've had from the UK
and the EU FDAs of, you know, increase in exports, uh,
have been modest by comparison to
what New Zealanders have been able
to do with those agreements.
But early estimates suggest to us
that this FDA will be worth a billion dollars worth
of extra exports to New Zealand every year
for the next 20 years.
I actually think it will be more than that,
and I think it will be faster than that.
But that does mean for us that it is comparable.
And as far as opportunity is concerned, uh,
to the benefits we have found as a export economy, uh, um,
uh, with, with with China, um,
that we have achieved things in this agreement that, uh,
others have not been able to.
So first for New Zealand in Kiwi fruit, uh,
we have a tariff free quota
that is four times our current exports, uh,
to India.
Uh, it is for a set period of time, which is a season
because it's kind of seasonal to them.
And outside of that tariff free quota
or anything else we send them, uh, is on parity with others.
Uh, a significant, uh, reduction.
Uh, we have a halving of the tariff rate
for apples with a quota.
Again, a very significant quota,
much larger than anything we've been able to sell them.
And equally in Manuka honey, we have a quota
where we have a reduction of the tariff rate.
So, so all this really says is that as we have to compete in
that market against others, because India does trade deals
or they already trade with other people,
we've either leveled the playing field
or we have advantage in that market
for New Zealand exporters, which, uh, allows
that trade to, to grow.
Going into the negotiation, we, we said we wanted to sort
of measure ourselves against Australia.
And with my counterpart, we agreed that it would be,
you know, we would look for an Australia Plus outcome,
the Australian FDA, how can we, uh,
be the same or improve upon that?
And in all, all areas of importance to New Zealand,
we have been able to, to do so.
You'll have seen just this week an announcement from
the European Union in India.
They have concluded what they call the mother
of all agreements.
Um, uh, uh, they, um, you know, there's not a lot of detail
yet, but from what we've been able to see, uh,
and look at, there are very few areas
where their agreement is better than ours.
In fact, I think ours probably in the formness of time,
when we get to compare it is a better agreement.
There are a couple of areas where they seem
to have done a little bit better.
Anecdotally. Uh, they have a quota to sell cars, uh,
from Europe into India.
We don't manufacture cars.
It appears they may have done better than us with wine.
The good news is for New Zealand wine exporters is we have a
nice, uh, a most failed nations, uh, uh, agreement
with India, MFN, which means if they give better, uh,
treatment to someone else and wine, they must extend it
to us one conditionality around that.
That can only happen if the New Zealand FDA enters into
force before the European Union FDA does.
If it doesn't, we miss out on that.
So if our FDA is in place, uh, active
before the eus one, then we gain the benefits
of the additional, uh, better market access for wine, uh,
that, uh, that, that the EU got.
Um, and normally, I, I wouldn't suggest
that would be a problem, except of course, the EU did ratify
the New Zealand EU FDA before us.
So we'll have some work to do
as a parliament if we want those benefits.
The second areas and services, we improved, uh, uh,
services access for New Zealanders.
In some areas, there is greater liberalization on the part
of the European Union, uh, but Mr.
Tus and the team also negotiated MFN on services,
so we can benefit there as well if we get it into forth.
The final bit I want to do is address some of the things
that we have, uh, uh, um, uh, that are in the agreement
that are important and good for New Zealand.
But there's been a lot of speculation around, uh,
we will be, uh,
in the coming weeks providing much more information
and detail about the agreement.
It is going through what we call the legal scrub,
the legal verification at the moment
to make sure the text clearly reflects the rights
and obligations each side has negotiated.
Uh, it then moves forward to a point of signing,
and it is our, uh, expectation that as normal,
the text is available to you and to all others.
But until the legal scrubbing is done, uh, the two, uh,
sides have agreed to do that work to make sure, uh, that,
uh, that, um, that it clearly reflects our concluded
negotiation in a number of areas.
Uh, there are things that we have agreed previously
and have replicated in this agreement.
Uh, the first is we have a skills shortage in
New Zealand in a number of areas.
We all hear this in our electorates.
We have a green list set up, uh,
through cabinet and immigration.
Successive governments have that, um, lists, uh, those areas
where we have a shortage of skill.
In this agreement, we have agreed a, a, a
temporary three year work permit for 1,670
Indian nationals, uh, from a number
of categories drawn from the green list,
New Zealand creates, and they have the ability to apply
for a visa and come and work here for three years.
And at the end of the three years, they must return home.
They have no right of extension under the FDA.
Um, uh, they also have the ability to apply for a visa
to come as everyone else in the world has under the school
shortage green list, should they choose to.
Uh, this is a smaller and limited number.
It has no other right or obligation.
So I want to be categorically clear.
This is nothing about immigration in this agreement.
There is nobody under this agreement has a right to come
to New Zealand, uh, in, under any condition other than the,
the, the policy set by a current
or future New Zealand government.
But should 1,670 Indians want to apply to come here, uh,
to work, uh, in an area, we have, uh,
a deficit of skills.
They have the ability to do so,
but they must meet the normal criteria.
At the moment, the criteria for the previous
and current government is, uh, they have to have the skills.
They have to have the experience,
they have to have the qualification.
They have to be of good standing.
They have to have good health.
They have to have a job offer from accredited employer.
They have to meet all of those conditions set.
And if a future government wants to change those conditions,
they have the ability to do so.
The FDA, uh, doesn't, uh, deal with that.
It gives them no right to bring a family member
to New Zealand under this temporary visa,
albeit in New Zealand, if you get a visa, uh,
that is more than one year as a work permit,
you do have the ability to bring those people in.
They don't have the right to work.
A current future government can look at that
and alter it, should they choose to.
Uh, the agreement, the, the trade agreement, uh,
doesn't restrict that ability to do that,
but it doesn't extend any additional or greater.
Right. The second area is around, uh, students.
Uh, what we've agreed, uh, is a number of things
because it is important that we get students from
around the world to come and work
and to study New Zealand to return home.
Currently, if somebody gets a visa to come
and be a student in New Zealand, uh,
they have a post-study work, right?
If it is a bachelor degree of fire for three years,
by the means is at the end of their, uh, study,
when they qualify, they're able to work in New Zealand
for three years, and then they have to return,
or they could find another visa under normal policy,
depending upon the, the,
the visa conditions are in this agreement.
We have agreed for a bachelor's degree,
a two year post-study work, right, for a STEM subject
or a master's degree, three years for a PhD, four years.
And the approach that I took in this is
that actually we want people to study in New Zealand.
We want them to study, uh, higher degrees.
And the ability in a very, uh, competitive world
for somebody that wants to come
and study a PhD, to work an additional year,
probably having, uh, uh, studied their PhD in an area
that our economy needs is good for us.
The challenge that India has at the moment is they have a,
a young population that is growing.
They are building universities as fast as they can.
They want to educate them
and where they're not able to, they want 'em to go overseas,
get education, get experience,
and bring that experience home back to India
for the good of their economy.
We've also agreed, uh, uh, a work right, uh,
of 20 hours per week.
When you are studying in New Zealand currently,
you have the ability, if you are working in,
if you're studying in New Zealand
and university, uh, to work for 25 hours, we've set that at,
at, uh, at 20 hours.
No other rights or obligations are extended.
If you want to study in New Zealand, you have
to meet the criteria set by normal policy of having funds,
of being a, you know, genuine, uh, student,
having been received and all those other things.
Uh, um, the final bit just on students has been speculation,
uh, of a change in the agreement about the number
of students that could come under this.
Uh, what I have read in the media is categorically wrong.
It is false. The FDA is silent on the number
of students who would come here.
It doesn't give a guarantee o of, of, of anything at all.
And the reason for that is currently under New Zealand
policy, there is no cap on students coming
from anywhere in the world.
If a current future government wanted to restrict the number
of students, they will have the ability to,
if a student from India comes here, they will have
that post study work, right, as others do.
But it doesn't, uh, give a a uncapped,
it doesn't give a commitment to say every student in India
can come to New Zealand.
It is for the New Zealand government through our cabinet
and our parliament to make those decisions.
So, I, I just want to clarify that and be very clear.
The final bit I want to look at is,
there was one other thing that we did, which was, uh,
an aspirational agreement
of investment from New Zealand into India.
And it's 20 billion New Years dollars over 15 years.
This was something that was important to India
as their economy grows.
It was actually something that was also important to us
because we have been able to achieve access
to the Indian market for New Zealand companies they've never
had before, rights of establishment.
And to go there, think of it this way,
India is putting a significant amount of resource into,
uh, infrastructure.
They are growing their country
and their economy through infrastructure.
There are New Zealand companies that will want to go
and set up offices
and operations there to be, be able to be part of
that infrastructure growth.
They have rights to do that now that they didn't before.
But the New Zealand government through this agreement,
has not made a commitment
for $20 billion worth of investment.
What we have done is agreed an aspirational target
to work towards it over 15 years.
What we have committed to is promoting investment
as we do already outward
and inward, uh, uh, investment, uh,
trade missions, all sorts of other things.
Make it easier for people to go there.
India is setting up a fast track desk to make it easier
to invest, uh, for New Zealanders, should they want
to the first time they've ever done that.
Uh, there was some speculation around, uh,
what it would mean if, if the $20 billion wasn't achieved.
Uh, well, our commitment is only to promote it.
And if we don't promote investment,
then actually India has the ability to come
and talk to us about that and raise some concern.
But there is no commitment.
It has dispute settlement against it over the amount
that is being, uh, invested.
I would tell you, although it's a very large amount
of money, I think it is achievable as that economy grows.
And if we were to achieve even just half of it in half
that period of time, the benefits
of New Zealand economy would be consider.
Considerable final bit on this and then I'll stop.
Uh, there's a New Zealand company
that manufactures beds in New Zealand.
Uh, they have announced, uh, since, uh, uh,
the FDA conclusion that they're looking to,
to establish a manufacturing facility in India.
It's a 20 $200 million investment.
They want to manufacture beds to sell in India
and to sell around the world.
It is easier for 'em to make that investment now
and to do that 'cause they have greater rights under the
agreement than they would have before.
They'll continue to manufacture here.
Uh, they may well have done
that without the free trade agreement,
but this free trade agreement has given them
great certainty.
And I think we will see much more of this
as we have seen investment in China
and many other parts of the world.
Um, um, sorry. I said find one.
There was one more bit I wanted to
deal with, which was dairy.
'cause we've talked about that a lot.
Lot it is clear to say we didn't get all the things we might
have wanted in theory, but we have got
advantages that others haven't.
And I would argue, although it is a very,
very sensitive issue for, uh, India, uh, given, uh,
you know, the size of their agricultural, uh, workforce
and how, uh, vulnerable it may well be
that we have cracked, cracked the, the, the wall of dairy
and slowly milk from New Zealand gets to drip through it.
If you think about, uh, the China FDA, it took 20 years
before we got full liberalization with the EU FDA,
it takes 30 years with the, sorry, with the UK FDA,
it takes 30 years with, uh, uh, EU FDA.
We never get it.
Uh, what we've been able to agree is access
for some very high value dairy products into that market.
Think of it this way, uh, milk powder is worth two, three,
4,000 US dollars a ton in this case a product.
We are putting in a worth 20 to 25,000 new New Zealand,
thousand New Zealand dollars, uh, per tub.
Uh, what we've also been able to do is agree
for the very first time with India, should New Zealand, uh,
dairy or food exporters put product into that market
for additional value being added for re-export,
there will be a zero tariff rate placed upon that.
And India is setting up a desk, a, a for New Zealand
to make sure the product can get in, uh, more easily.
Now, if you think about it, uh, a dairy producer, uh,
may well want to partner with somebody in India
or set up their own processing facility
to take New Zealand product
and Indian product to then get access to other markets
around the world that India has an FDA with that we don't.
And over that period of time for the next 10 years,
those relationships will grow.
Uh, I think if you invite us back in 10 years time,
Damien and I will still be here.
We'll come back. And ultimately I think you will see us
selling much more on many products in their
market than we do today.
This agreement is good for New Zealand.
It is better than Australians.
It's one of the best that PanAir has done
with any country of the world.
We are 5 million people. They are 1.4 billion people.
And I give you this absolute guarantee.
If it wasn't a good deal, we wouldn't have done it.
We would've still been negotiating.
Uh, it'll do nothing but positive
things for the New Zealand economy.
Excellent. Thank you very much, minister.
And can I congratulate you?
And thank you for all the work you've put into this
as well as the wider team.
I know it's been a huge effort over the last couple
of years, and we're very excited
to see the opportunity this presents.
Now, I know there are questions for members, uh,
first from Honorable Dam.
Uh, look and,
and look, thank you very much for presentation.
Uh, congratulations. And to Vic Galley as well.
But a minister would be rather, uh, I,
I think I do challenge you on your comparison
to the China ft A and dairy access.
The reality is that we've got very little dairy access
in this agreement,
and we had huge volumes into China,
which we have utilized.
So I think that's an unfair comparison.
Putting that to one side, I think, you know,
what you've achieved is, is a step forward.
And so I, I acknowledge
That just, just on that. Not to
be argumentative, but I'm
not claiming it's the same as that.
I'm saying we didn't get, uh,
uh, anywhere near as much as we wanted.
But here's the interesting thing.
If you take all dairy that we sold, sold to China out of
that equation to last year,
China is still our number one export market.
And so the point that I'm making is there is huge
opportunity across the New Zealand economy.
You know, we are much more than just dairy producers,
although if they're very important part of our export Pro
profile, the case that I'm making is that, that, um, take,
take, uh, take ship me, right?
When Australia did their FDA, um, two th 2020,
so incident force three years ago, yeah, three years ago
before that, uh, we saw, uh, about 89%
of the lamb import India came from New Zealand.
Today, we are about eight
or 9% of the land that exported to India.
Uh, um, Australia is over 90%.
So we will see our trade grow exponentially during that,
this next period of time.
And the case that I'm making is
because we have been able to get some dairy in there,
and these, these relationships will grow.
I do think in a decade's time
that the conversation we have about dairy access
and other things in India will
change, but it'll only change.
We put effort in, and of course, we didn't get anywhere near
as much as we would've wanted in this agreement.
Thank you. And I, I, I appreciate that.
Look, we've had, we've heard, um,
response from different parties and,
and different areas of the economy, I guess around, uh,
migration and,
and some might say a somewhat paranoid approach to it.
It's great, great that you clarified some of those figures,
and I, I guess had the benefit of briefings as well.
But the, the point you made
and you highlighted was the one
of skills shortages in our country.
And, and I would like to point to the fact that
your government has reduced the support
for the apprenticeship schemes across our economy.
And I think it's rightful criticism that at the same time,
when that support has been withdrawn
for employers
and for some of those apprenticeships,
then the door's being opened for, uh,
for people from other countries.
And I, I, I think that's a,
while you may think it's a slight extrapolation, it's one
of the points that might be made
and criticism, uh,
of the migration settings in this agreement, um, accepting,
I accept the fact that actually you've got a
pretty reasonable deal on the numbers.
So just on that,
but that's not the criticism of being made.
In fact, you're the first person to raise that I think of
as far as the FDA is concerned.
The FDA is fairly silent on, um, on, in fact,
it's completely silent, uh, on, um, uh, on apprenticeships.
I, I wanna be very clear, this FDA has no migration, right?
Or responsibilities in at all. It's silent on that.
In fact, it's more than silent on that.
It, it doesn't come up.
And so ultimately what it does is allows people to come
and work for a, a short set period of time.
Uh, I, I may not, I'm not gonna do it now,
but I disagree strongly with your, your, um, uh, the way
that you have explained our approach
to, uh, apprenticeships.
Because ultimately, uh,
there've always been she skills shortage in New Zealand,
they move from time to time.
We have a shortage of nurses at the moment.
When I first came to Parliament,
we didn't have enough nurses, then nurses couldn't get jobs.
Now we don't have enough. It changes over a period of time.
What this agreement does is allows us some discussion
with the government to change the skills shortage list so
that actually as we need, uh, we need skills in our economy.
The FDA can mobilize, uh, should we want it.
But it comes back to the point that, that I made earlier,
uh, every other, uh, setting that they, we have in place
around, uh, temporary work access to New Zealand
or changes in the future are possible
because the agreement doesn't limit, uh, uh, current
or future governments in the area.
Can I, one more, can I just clarify the fact?
'cause I, I think I heard correctly in the briefing that,
um, the 1,667 per annum that will be guaranteed
actually, um, deliver no rights
to residency automatically. Not
That true. So
not automatically.
They don't, a government,
a future government could decide they want
to give it under normal policy.
Nothing to do with residency at all.
So, so if you apply for a visa, it'll work like this if you,
so, uh, um, it would, engineers is on the list
because we need engineers,
particularly construction engineers.
Firstly, an engineer from India would have
to have equivalency in New Zealand and be recognized.
If they're not, then they're not able to come and work here.
That would mean they couldn't get the visa.
Secondly, they have to be of good conduct.
They would have to provide,
everyone else does a police certificate
showing that good conduct.
They have to be of good health.
They would have to have a job offer
that meets the criteria set New Zealand at the moment.
And you have to earn a certain amount
and, uh, be paid a certain amount
and it has to be an accredited employer.
If they do all that, they can then apply
for this visa already, though they can apply
for the normal school shortage visa should they want to.
So there are two pathways. All this does.
It says there will always be 1,670 places
available to India.
But you would have to get a job
and there would have to be in a skill shortage list.
And outside of that, at the end
of the three years, you must leave.
And if you want to come back again under that visa, you have
to wait three years to apply.
It gives no right at all to remain in New Zealand.
Other than that three years,
A really close up. Um,
and thank you minister
and thanks to the wider team, um, for this agreement.
So giving all that considered,
essentially it's removing some red tape in order to get, um,
workers that we know we need.
And I think of the agriculture sector particularly, um,
becoming an accredited employer if you're a
small business, really challenging.
Um, so do you see some benefits there in that sense?
Well, well look, the agriculture's a huge benefits
and as far as export opportunity, uh, um, um, you know,
if you think about apples,
and this is something the apple sector
of New Zealand was very keen on,
I honestly was not sure we would get apples.
'cause they've never given any preference in
apples at all, anywhere.
And to have a very, very large quota, uh,
a very large quota at halving,
the tariff rate is just a real advantage.
The EU didn't get that from, from memory.
They, they got something that's not as good as ours.
So there is benefits across the board
for the agricultural sector.
Uh, I, I'll go and check the detail,
but I think in as far as a is concern, uh,
some agricultural, uh, professions are on the green list.
Mm-hmm. Uh, people with skills can come in on, uh, with, uh,
the f fda a with India, I don't believe that they, they are.
Mm-hmm. Uh, so somebody who wants to come
and work in agriculture from India would've
to come in the normal pathway.
They're not able to. But, but,
but largely though, the, the point is the same,
putting agriculture aside,
if we think about healthcare professionals, uh,
or we think about engineers
or ICT, if we have a skill shortage,
we need those people here and from anywhere in the world.
But in this case, India has skill
and can meet our requirements.
The New Zealand businesses get to benefit from that skill.
I mean, coming back to Damien's point, you are right,
we want to train New Zealanders,
but to train a New Zealand engineer to the, to the,
the skill level we require at the moment
is not an apprenticeship.
It is 15 years sometimes or more.
And we have the ability to bring these people in
for three years and benefit from 'em.
They have to return home.
I guess what we're doing is saying to India
as they grow their economy, we're gonna use your skill
and experience to also help our economy grow
so we can produce more to sell more back to you.
Right. Dr. Lauren, she
Thank you, uh, chair.
Thank you minister for coming.
Um, I guess my first question you mentioned in terms of
that the texts will be available sort of over time.
Could you give us a timeline in of when that would be? Uh,
Well, I see It's very hard to make.
Yeah, yeah. Well, um, we, we, there's a lot
of information we're starting to provide put out there that,
that, that speaks to the test and starts to explain
or continue to do that.
I see the European Union included this week have said
that they're going through a similar process
and they think it will take six months for them.
With India, we are working as quickly as we can.
The first thing is legal verification.
The lawyers get together and make sure that it, it, it does
what we say it does.
And thereafterwards, we will set the time to, um, to, um,
to sign and we'll be able
to talk a bit more about the timeframe
we're going as quickly as we can.
Uh, by the way, this is sort
of a similar process we've followed with most agreements.
So we're not doing it, but in, in every case,
every case we've had to trade agreement, we have
to reach agreement with our
partners. Both sides are willing,
Fair enough. But I mean, it
won't be a long time.
Obviously Devo is in the detail, right?
So, you know, until we've done that, we would like
to make our own judgment in terms of the text as
Look at our faces. We're
very trusting people. Mm-hmm.
Fair enough. Um, just on one other, uh,
I do have a couple points, but I know other people have
questions, but I think one of the things in
what has been released, it talks about 95% remove on
tariff on forestry product.
But one of the things that this committee has heard
previously is the impact that non tariff barriers,
particularly when it comes to methyl bromite,
has actually on the forestry.
So 95% of a removal
of tariff is nothing when the fact
that our forestry has been decimated by 90% since 2019.
Yeah. So is there something that we are seeing in terms
of the non terror barrier aspect?
Yes. So, so nothing but good news.
In fact, on my very first visit to India, um, two years ago,
uh, soon after the election, had raised with the minister,
because you're right, uh, New Zealand wood products,
it's logs couldn't get into that market.
That's because of a change in New Zealand.
It's nothing the Indians did.
We decided not to use methyl bromide anymore.
They accept it. We want to use other products.
They weren't sure they were as effective.
They were concerned if they let our logs in
and the pest came with it, it would create a disease there.
We've worked through that and
the logs been able to go again.
We've reached agreement with them.
And so the log trade continues. So that's good news.
Uh, and in fact, it used to be a 300, uh,
million dollars export market for us, uh,
virtually since the Australia FDA,
they have taken most of that.
We will, we will get that back.
Uh, but there are many things in the agreement
around working on non-tariff barriers, getting them down.
For instance, uh, we have agreed in there, um, uh,
clearance at port, uh, of, is it 24
and 48 hours, 24 hours for per goods food, 48 hours
for other things and set up desks to work through that.
But in particular around the work we do on tbs,
maybe I'll pass to you and you can talk a bit more about
what we're doing more broadly and also in the agreement.
Yeah. So not to, um, have always been a,
a significant difficulty in,
in actually in all of our trade agreements.
And so what we've done in this agreement is applied some
of the learning that we, that we've had from the
difficulty we've faced elsewhere.
And one of the innovations in this agreement is
that there will be a cross-cutting committee.
So normally in a free trade agreement,
you have a committee for each chapter.
Mm-hmm. S-P-S-T-B-T, we have all of those,
but we've also introduced a cross cutting committee
with the agreement of India that will cover S-P-S-T-B-T.
So fighter barriers. Yeah, technical barriers to trade.
Also the goods committee, the three groups will sit together
along with the customs colleagues to be able to work on, uh,
non tariff barriers in, in fact, in both directions.
'cause it was a priority for the deal
as well to work on that.
So it is an innovation that we've introduced
as a consequence of what we've
learned over the last few years.
And also because it's been a, a longstanding priority
to deal with, uh, with
These. And, and, and,
and again, in the very early meetings I had
with, uh, P Sky, Indian Trade Minister of course came down
to New Zealand to take a close
look at what we're doing last year.
And for a negotiation, I said to him, we should look
to get a committee or officials together.
Wouldn't it be good if we can identify TBS
before they happen and solve them?
So our businesses never know about them and trade goes up
and, and they've not done this widely anywhere else.
Uh, that's sort of where the committees
that are set up formally on the FDA lead to, uh, you know,
we identify 'em early, we fixed 'em.
We'll never get thanks for 16
something done, but he knows about.
But the case of methyl bromide had we were able to see
that coming and had a committee in a way to engage
with them more quickly, perhaps the trade would've remained
where it was rather than Australia cannibalizing
it. But we will get it back.
One final question, chair.
Um, so UK concluded FDA with India in July last year.
And as part of their own impact assessment,
it predicts a degree, uh, quantum,
a minuscule increases gross GDP of 0.13%
or $4.8 billion in the long run.
Um, do you know if our NIA
or our assessment will be looking into similar in terms
of the, the pure economic gains
and whether that be, will you
anticipate to be more than what
UK So so, so I anticipate to be much,
much more than uk Uh, the UK
and you already have a lot of trade.
They do a lot together. There's, you know, if you look at,
um, some of the things they have around, uh, work rights
and so on the uk, UK has separate agreements, uh, with them.
So they didn't need to do much of that in their FDA
'cause they've already done it separately.
I mean, that indication, I said, if a billion dollars worth
of trade extra every year for the next 20 years,
I think is modest, although
we're gonna work very, very hard at that.
But the, the NA will have all the
information we normally would.
Um, I don't know. It'll go and compare us to the uk.
But the reason our trade will grow exponentially much more
quickly than the UKs is one, we are underdone there.
But when our exporters decide to go to a market,
I'm not joking, they are honestly better at
what they do than most other countries.
I mean, with, uh, the UAE, the agreement went into force.
Um, the beginning of last year, the,
the increase in exports, the UAE last year was not only, uh,
greatest of any country we trade with.
It is one of the greatest increases we've ever seen.
Now it comes off a modest base.
We sold about a billion dollars there.
But the point of that is that wasn't a market
with high, high tariff rates.
Right? Uh, uh, uh,
although the tariffs
that we were facing there were detrimental,
but Kiwis have floated in there.
Take wine as an example, right?
The tariff rate today on New Zealand wine exported
to India is 150%.
Uh, for a wine valued 20 US dollars
or above, it drops to 25%.
And for 20 uh, dollars us
or below to 40%, my figures are correct.
So 50 50, 55 to 50, 50%.
Um, so if you think about it, that's a minimum
of a hundred percent tariff rate taken off.
Guess who's wine Indians will be drinking soon.
It will be ours. 'cause wine exporters from New Zealand are
gonna go there as they go everywhere else.
But you've got a slightly better deal if we can get this
into force before theirs.
Uh, actually we, uh, get it, uh, lower again.
So, so to answer your question,
is any I do the work job it normally does.
I expect that. Uh, so, so I do ask, in fact
to be very cautious on their predictions when they
do this 'cause we should be.
Mm-hmm. But, uh, we have seen with EU and the UK
and the UAE based on their predictions,
we have outperformed that in the first few years.
Excellent. Uh, quick question from me. Thanks minister.
I just wanna acknowledge, of course the,
I think fantastic outcome
for sheep meat in particular, great result.
Um, as well as across the horticulture sector.
There's a lot of fantastic things in here. Mm-hmm.
Of course coming from the largest dairy farming region,
New Zealand, as you well know, I'd love
to have seen a bit more, uh, in there,
but appreciate the complexity of that given
that our farms are just so good.
Um, so having said all that though,
I'd be really interested if you could give us some insight
into what the tariff reduction value would be on day one
when it comes into force, just so that we can get a bit
of a yeah, a sense of
So coming.
So I'll pass to for the detail, but 50.
So, so on day one, 57%
of everything we export is tariff free.
Uh, and over the course of I'm fully entering on force,
which I think becomes about 10 years, it goes up to, uh,
87.
Yeah, I think you've got the tariff rate 87%
and then significant tariff production in some of the,
the, the other areas.
Uh, um, if you think about some of the areas, sheik meat
as an example, 33% down to zero wool comes down, uh,
straight away very, very quickly as well.
Although the tariff rate there is not high, it is a very,
very competitive, uh, um, um, commodity in that market.
And when you were walk away from it being a commodity,
you've got, you know, the more valuable products
that can make quite a difference.
And so I think on day one you will see, as you did, uh,
in other agreements, quite a lot of trade come quite quickly
as a result of those tariff rates.
Because we've become more competitive,
it will then be a very long, a very hard slow to continue
to build resilience in that market.
Uh, and that's the area where, uh,
the government is putting in more effort
through New Zealand trade enterprise, uh,
and our diplomatic posts in that market.
You have seen us do trade missions already.
The prime minister do. And I took a a forestry wood product
one up there at the end of last year
and they went into negotiation.
Uh, we've never done that before.
They came back seeing nothing but opportunity.
In fact, one of 'em did a deal, deal with, he was up there
and we'll do much more of it.
So I guess the point of this is tariff
freights are important to get 'em down.
Tbs, uh, getting them right are absolutely correct.
That's the next big thing we have to do.
Sometimes it's more important than
tariff freights if you ask me.
But we have to do the two together, but then a bit to go out
and promote trade and grow it
as partly the government's responsibility
with the private sector.
Uh, we will be doing a lot of that in India
because that's how we'll see the most growth
exports, uh, over time
Please. Um,
also the tariff saving based on our current trade.
And I think it's really important to remember
that our current trade traders constrained
by very high status, a minimum base.
Yeah. So, so the minimum, minimum that we, uh,
secure is just under 50 million on the first day
of the entry into force is what the saving will be for,
uh, New Zealand exporters.
Current exporters, as I said, constrained by the trade.
So we know what happened to Australia when
it steel was done.
So you've had the sheet talked about sheet meat.
Forestry, 119% increase in Australian exports.
There 19% decline in ours, uh, during that period,
uh, for fish and seafood.
Um, 269% increase for Australia.
Our trade fell by 67% during that period.
We simply cannot compete in the Indian market when our
competitors have a tariff preference
and we're still paying the 33%, you know, in the case
of wine 150%, that's simply not sustainable.
And you can see that in the, uh, in what happened
to Australia's Trade Australia
and services, for example, 70% increase in services exports,
uh, there, once the FGA came up,
ours just continue to track down.
So 15% decline for us.
So the urgency of getting this to place
and to make sure that we're competing at least at a level
playing field with Australia, the UK at the eu,
and then enjoy the preference that we have against all
of our other competitors, uh, there is an urgency. That's
Right. And just, just to finally
that,
and dam, I know you've got another question, but,
but, um, if you think about wine, right?
So what's the tariff saving on day one for wine?
Virtually nothing. 'cause we sell them very little wine
'cause 150% tariff rate.
We have a hundreds, 125% taken off that.
So what we will see is not a great, uh, uh,
saving on day one of tariffs, you know,
of duty that we're paying.
But you'll see why export go up, uh, almost as quickly
as we can grow the world's best grapes for wine.
Excellent. Daniel, Look, thank you very much.
One other area of, of some confusion, I guess a a across,
um, some of the sectors is the one
around the investment obligations.
Oh yeah. And so there's a view that, you know,
that the government has to invest or, um, you know,
or if you don't invest, this might collapse.
So maybe if you could yeah.
Outline the investment provisions in the, the
Thank you. So, so,
um, so uh, the government does not have
to invest $20 billion, right?
Uh, uh, is not a commitment.
Uh, nor is there a commitment
for the private sector to do so.
But what we have committed to is an aspirational target of
that $20 billion over 15 years.
It will work very hard to do that
'cause it will be good for the New Zealand economy
as we work hard to bring investment in this direction.
If it is good for New Zealand, the commitment
that we have taken is to promote investment.
And if the New Zealand government doesn't promote investment
at the end of that 15 year period, then India has ability
to say, well you didn't do what you're saying.
And then they can enter into a process with us.
But there has been some, uh, you know, uh, um, confusion
around exactly what it looks like
because often when you take uh, uh, uh,
put something in agreement, there is an obligation there.
Uh, it is an obligation
for the New Zealand government to promote.
And I expect we will start
to see investment over time flow quite
quickly into that market.
Because ultimately, again, it's 1.4 billion people,
their economy is growing very, very quickly.
And many of the things we do here people want to do there,
there also, but I dunno if there's any more detail you want.
No, that was straight Co. Yeah.
So, so again, I can say categorically, uh,
there is no commitment on the part of current
or future governments to invest $20 billion US in India, uh,
nor telling the private sector that they have to.
But it is an obligation to promote
and it's an obligation that we ensu future governments will
take very, very seriously.
Uh, let me use an example of dairy.
We know that some New Zealand dairy companies have factories
around the world to set up a partnership
to take domestic product to be able to add
to ours to sell in that market.
If it's hard to get in or to export, we have them in Europe.
I can see a time because of greater certainty
provided by the FDA
and greater right as well as obligation
that New Zealand dairy companies may well want to go
and set up a factory there to add value
to New Zealand product and take Indian product to export.
We see this quite often.
You know, Sri Lanka's a very important market
for New Zealand previously.
It's a pretty tough dairy market now for a range of reasons.
There is a very good free trade agreement
between India and Sri Lanka.
It will be for New Zealand company
to decide whether they want to take advantage of that
or not, not for the government,
but we have made it easier for them to do so.
That single desk to be set up
to help investment go in there more seamlessly.
And the promotion we do, at the very least,
we'll provide opportunities for Kiwis
to make those decisions. And,
And sorry, just and,
and the rules of origin are provisions in the trade deal
don't restrict New Zealand's ability to do that.
No. Uh, so this is import for re-export? No.
So we bring it in, uh, you add value if it's,
you wouldn't mention have to even add value.
You could just package it as long
as it's re-exported at zero.
But the point of this is you would add value to it
because actually you think about many of,
there are companies on Terra,
they're talking about value, not volume.
And so where we've got to,
and it's again, I mean I'll be very clear,
we didn't get all the things that we would want in dairy.
We're still waiting to see everything of the European Union.
It appears like they might not have got anything at all,
but they might have got some things.
We'll see. Certainly though both sides have come out
and said dairy was excluded.
That's not what we've said on our side.
But the point is this, we have focused on value
and you know, albums, we have a, um,
which are very high value concentrated proteins.
3000 tons per 3000 tons per year.
Halving of the tariff rate, you know,
$25,000 New Zealand a ton
or more compared to what's milk powder at the moment given
milk powder, $5,000 a something, you know, uh, uh,
ultimately, um, we didn't, you know, I would like both.
It was not possible to get it,
but we actually have got some things others didn't.
And it has value, but an opportunity for us to keep going.
The other thing that we've forgotten this agreement, uh,
around dairy, uh, that the EU now have also but hadn't
before, is a right to negotiate Should India, uh, uh,
give dairy access to another similar economy.
We have a right to negotiate with them.
Uh, and they've given that to the European Union as well.
Uh, we also have written in there that we want to continue
to improve this agreement, not renegotiate it.
So, so normally dam you would know this,
you have an agreement and in 10 years time you say Reise
negotiate or we keep saying we wanna renegotiate.
Eventually you get there, we've said 12 month, we've agreed
and, and the FDA 12 months
after it entered into the force,
we will meet in the committee
and we'll continue to find ways to improve the agreement
that could improve the tariff access.
It will be around TBS and so on.
So rather than the approach that says,
gonna do this drop dead in 10 years time, let's renegotiate,
let's every year find ways to improve it
and as others get better access, we can say,
well we should do the same as India.
Maywell to us. Alright, well thank you very much.
May I may, um, borrow two more minutes of your time
because there's something I meant to
address at the beginning.
I didn't. And this is around the treaty ang clause
and, uh, cultural trade.
Uh, the treaty ang clause is in the agreement, uh, as uh,
has been in every agreement.
It was not easy to negotiate,
but we took a lot of time to explain it well
and the reasons why and reached agreement on that
because it was important to New Zealand.
It's been in all agreements for a period of time.
Uh, we also have a cultural trade chapter
of the promotion and so on.
It differs a little bit from others.
Some of the other agreements talks about, you know,
uh, a multi trade.
It is very similar. It is the same.
It just is called cultural trade.
And so, uh, very clearly the things that we have seen in,
in previous agreements, including the other two
that we've done this term, the GCC and the UAE and the EU
and the uk, uh,
is replicated across the board in this language.
Sometimes different, but it has generally the same effect.
Very good. All right, thanks again for coming in.
Really appreciate the, you so much a fantastic agreement.
Uh, I can confirm that the committee will, uh,
use all efficiency to consider the
Received. Thank much.
Thank
You.